[[nquality_of_service]]
= Neutron - Quality of Service (QoS)

Quality of Service (QoS) is used to provide differentiated services (DS) on
network traffic. This will allow policies to be created to filter and govern
network traffic flow.  When applied to a virtual network environment, this
filtering and policing takes place at the _Network Port_ level, specifically the
port to which the virtual machine or container is connected to the virtual
network. This effectively policies all traffic exiting the VM and entering the
virtual network.

QoS is configured with standard Neutron operations via the MidoNet Neutron
plugin or directly via the MidoNet CLI. Note that using the MidoNet CLI will
bypass the Neutron operations and end up with policies and rules that are not
tracked in the Neutron database. For this reason, it is highly suggested to use
the standard Neutron QoS commands when the virtual environment is based on
OpenStack (this doc), and MidoNet CLI (<<quality_of_service>>)
when OpenStack is not present.

++++
<?dbhtml stop-chunking?>
++++

== Creating Quality of Service Policies

In order to use QoS policies, a policy must be created, rules added to it, and
then that policy must be applied to a _Port_ (or to all ports on a _Network_).

=== Creating a QoS Policy object

QoS policies can be created via the Neutron command:

[source]
$ neutron qos-policy-create --description <desc> --shared <true|false> <name>

Where _desc_ is an optional description, _shared_ can be set to *true* (share
this policy among all tenants) or *false* (make this policy available only to
this tenant), and _name_ will name this policy (the name is the only required
field).

[[nqos_create_policy_rule]]
=== Creating QoS Policy Rules for a Policy

Even though a QoS policy is created, it's just an empty box with no rules set
until some rules are created on the policy. Rules must be created directly on a
specific policy, and the rule _type_ must be decided ahead of time. Rules cannot
be created standalone nor can they be shared between policies. Rules are only
applicable to the policy on which they were created.

==== Bandwidth Limit Rules

A Bandwidth Limit type rule will limit data throughput on a port. There are two
meters that can be applied via a bandwidth limit rule: maximum data rate over a
long period of time (referred to as "_max_kbps_"), and maximum data burst
allowed with a very short window (referred to as "_max_burst_kbps_", which
unfortunately implies a data rate, when in practice, this is a maximum limit on
data sent at a particular time).

[NOTE]
========================
*How Linux Meters Traffic*

The best way to contextualize this is to actually explain briefly how the
mechanics of how Linux implements data rate limiting. Basically, picture a
bucket with tokens. The _max_kbps_ represents how many tokens put into the
bucket each second (e.g. 1,000 kbps means 1,000 tokens are put into the bucket
every second). The _max_burst_kbps_ represents the maximum number of tokens
allowed in the bucket. For every byte of data that passes through the port, a
token is removed from the bucket. If there are not enough tokens in the bucket
for the packet to take, the packet is dropped.

This means that the tokens can fill up over time up to a maximum of
_max_burst_kbps_, which can then allow a large packet to pass through, however
if the traffic is constant at _max_kbps_, this means tokens are being removed
from the bucket as fast as they are being added, and larger packets will be
dropped as there will never be enough tokens available.

image::qos_token_bucket_773x954.png[scaledwidth="100%"]
========================

*Creating a Bandwidth Limit Rule*

Bandwidth limit rules can be created via the Neutron command:

[source]
$ neutron qos-bandwidth-limit-rule-create --max-kbps <max_kbps> --max-burst-kbps <max_burst_kbps> <policy_id>

Where _policy ID_ is the UUID of the policy to add the rule to, _max_kbps_ is
the maximum sustained data rate allowed (rate to fill the token bucket in the
example above), and _max_burst_kbps_ is the maximum packet size allowed (maximum
tokens allowed in the token bucket in the example above).

==== DSCP Marking Rules

A QoS policy can have rules added to alter the IPv4 ToS field (now used for
DSCP) of every packet that enters the cloud via a port. This will affect all
IPv4 packets coming into the cloud on the port with the QoS policy set. Packets
exiting the cloud on the port will not be affected. At this time, the DSCP
marking rules will affect all packets, meaning the last DSCP marking rule will
replace the ToS field with its marking value, overwriting any previous values
set (even by other DSCP marking rules). This is to say that it really only makes
sense to have a single DSCP marking rule on any QoS policy.

*Creating a DSCP Marking Rule*

DSCP marking rules can be created via the Neutron command:

[source]
$ neutron qos-dscp-marking-rule-create --dscp-mark <dscp_mark>

Where _policy ID_ is the UUID of the policy to add the rule to and _dscp_mark_
is the value that will be written to each IPv4 packet's ToS field.

== Applying QoS Policies

QoS rules are not actually put into effect unless they are attached to a port on
a virtual network that has ingress traffic from a VM or container. Once attached
to a port, the policy will regulate traffic on that port.

There are two ways to apply the effects of a QoS policy: either apply it
directly to a specific port, or apply it to an entire network, which will affect
all ports on that network.

[IMPORTANT]
When a QoS policy is specified on both a port AND that port's network, the
specific port's policy will apply, overriding the network setting.

If a port does not have a specific policy, or if it's specific policy is
removed, traffic will then conform to the QoS policy on the network, if present.
In this way, a default can be set for an entire network, with specific ports
overriding the policy to their own individual needs.

If a QoS policy which is attached to a port or network has its rule set updated
(either a rule is deleted or a rule is created), that change will take effect on
that network or port immediately upon the update. A separate update of the port
or network object is not necessary.

=== Applying a QoS Policy to a Single Port

Policies are applied to a port at the QoS policy object-level. The individual
rules on that policy object will be applied. It is not possible to only apply a
subset of rules on a policy to a port. If a specific port needs special handling
where only a subset of rules should be applied, then an entire new QoS policy
object must be created with only the desired subset of rules added to it, and
that new policy can then be applied to the special port.

Note that, unlike rules, the QoS policy object *can* be set on many ports or
networks, in which case the policy's rules will apply in the same way to each
port with the policy.

A port can be updated to have a QoS policy via the Neutron command:

[source]
$ neutron port-update --qos-policy <policy_id> <port_id>

The _policy ID_ is the UUID of the created QoS policy object, and the port ID is
the UUID of the port to be updated.

Ports can also be created with the QoS policy set:

[source]
$ neutron port-create <...other params...> --qos-policy <policy_id> <network_id>

Where _policy ID_ is the UUID of the policy object and network ID is the UUID of
the network on which to create the port. Other parameters can be specified along
with _qos-policy_.

=== Applying a QoS Policy to All Ports on a Network

QoS Policies can also be applied to an entire network, in which case all
VM/container ports on that network will have to rules applied. Again, if a
particular port ever has a separate QoS policy assigned to it (via the above
command, for example), that port's specific policy will take effect instead of
the network's policy. The QoS policy that will be applied will be determined at
any time by: a) If the port has a policy, use that, otherwise b) if the network
has a policy, use that, otherwise c) use no QoS policy. Any updates to either
the port's or network's QoS policy settings will take effect immediately.

A network can be updated to have a QoS policy via the Neutron command:

[source]
$ neutron net-update --qos-policy <policy_id> <port_id>

The _policy ID_ is the UUID of the created QoS policy object, and the _network
ID_ is the UUID of the network to be updated.

Networks can also be created with the QoS policy set:

[source]
$ neutron net-create <...other params...> --qos-policy <policy_id> <name>

Where _policy ID_ is the UUID of the policy object and name is the desired name
of the network. Other parameters can be specified along with _qos-policy_.

== Listing Active Policies and their Rules

QoS policies and their rules can be listed, displaying their parameters.

=== Listing All Policies

These commands will list all policy objects.

[source]
$ neutron qos-policy-list

This will list all policies along with their rules.

=== Listing Rules on a Policy

These commands will list all rules for a given policy.

$ neutron qos-bandwidth-limit-rule-list <policy_id>

Where _policy ID_ is the UUID of the policy object to list the rules from.

=== Listing the Policy Active for a Port or Network

These commands show the configured QoS policy for a port or network.

[source]
$ neutron port-show <port_id>

Where _port ID_ is the UUID of the port to show the configured QoS policy. This
will display the port information. The UUID of the configured QoS policy will be
set under the "qos_policy_id" field. If the field is absent or not set, then no
QoS policy is set on the port.

For a network, the process is the same:

[source]
$ neutron net-show <network_id>

Where _network ID_ is the UUID of the network to show the configured QoS policy.
This will display the network information. The UUID of the configured QoS policy
will be set under the "qos_policy_id" field. If the field is absent or not set,
then no QoS policy is set on the network.

== Updating Policies

QoS policies can be updated to change the policy parameters and the parameters
of the rules on the policy. A policy must have been created to update it, but it
does not have to have active rules or be attached to any port or network in
order to update it. To update rules on a policy, the rule must be updated
directly, which means bulk updates of rules are not supported.

=== Updating General Policy Information

General policy information includes the name of the policy, it's description and
whether or not it' shared across tenants.

To update a policy, simply issue the command:

[source]
$ neutron qos-policy-update --name <name> --description <desc> --shared <true|false> <policy_id>

Where _name_ is the name of the policy, _desc_ is an optional short description,
_shared_ specifies whether to allow other tenants to access this policy, and
_policy ID_ is the UUID of the QoS policy object to update. If a parameter is
omitted, it will not be updated and will remain unchanged.

=== Updating Rules on a Policy

QoS policies can also have updates to the set of rules that are set on that
policy. This is done through an update to the rule on the policy. Rules can only
be updated one-by-one. When a rule's parameters are updated, the change will
take effect immediately upon the update.

==== Updating a Bandwidth Limit Rule

These commands update the Bandwidth Limit rules for a QoS policy.

[source]
$ neutron qos-bandwidth-limit-rule-update --max-kbps <max_kbps> --max-burst-kbps <max_burst_kbps> <rule_id> <policy_id>

Where _rule ID_ is the UUID of the rule to update, _policy ID_ is the UUID of
the policy the rule belongs to, _max_kbps_ is the maximum sustained data rate
allowed (rate to fill the token bucket in the example above), and
_max_burst_kbps_ is the maximum packet size allowed (maximum tokens allowed in
the token bucket in the example above).

==== Updating a DSCP Marking Rule

These commands update the DSCP marking rules for a QoS policy.

[source]
$ neutron qos-dscp-marking-rule-update --dscp-mark <dscp_mark>

Where _rule ID_ is the UUID of the rule to update, _policy ID_ is the UUID of
the policy the rule belongs to, and _dscp_mark_ is the value to set in each IPv4
packet's ToS field.

=== Changing Rules on a Policy

Changing which rules are active on a QoS policy basically boils down to either
creating or deleting rules directly. You cannot affect the rules on a policy by
manipulating the policy object itself, it must be done by targeting the
individual rule on a specific policy. This also means that bulk changes of rules
on a policy (like deleting many rules at a time, clearing all rules, creating
many rules at once) are not supported. Please see xref:qos_create_policy_rule[]
and xref:qos_delete_policy_rule[].

== Deleting QoS Policies

QoS policy objects or individual rules can be deleted. Rules must be deleted
individually from a specific QoS policy object. If a QoS policy object is
deleted, all rules that belong to that object are also deleted. If a deleted QoS
policy is attached to a port or network, that link is cleared and the
_qos-policy-id_ field of the port or network object is set to empty.

[[nqos_delete_policy_rule]]
=== Deleting a Rule on a Policy

A single rule on a QoS policy object can be deleted to remove its effects from
the policy. Once a rule is deleted from a policy, traffic through any associated
ports or networks will cease to be affected by the rule's parameters immediately
after it is deleted.

[source]
$ neutron qos-bandwidth-limit-rule-delete <rule_id> <policy_id>

Or:

[source]
$ neutron qos-dscp-marking-rule-delete <rule_id> <policy_id>

Where _rule ID_ is the UUID of the rule to delete, _policy ID_ is the UUID of
the policy the rule belongs to.

=== Deleting an Entire Policy

An entire QoS policy, and any attached rules, can be deleted at a single time
with the following commands. Once a policy is deleted, it will immediately cease
to have any effect on any network traffic. All rules created on the deleted
policy will be cleaned up and removed, and all networks and ports attached to
this policy will have their _qos-policy-id_ fields cleared.

[source]
$ neutron qos-policy-delete <policy_id>

Where _policy ID_ is the UUID of the policy to delete.
