[[l2insertion_object]]
= L2Insertion Object

The L2Insertion object has these fields (see the REST documentation for more
detail):

. inspected VM port UUID
. inspected VM MAC
. service port UUID
. VLAN tag
. fail-open (true/false)
. position

The first 3 fields are the most important to consider. Imagine an L2Insertion
configured as described by the following diagram.

The position is an absolute position in the list of insertions. If two
insertions have the same position the order is undefined. When we load the
insertions we basically sort by the position field. In many ways, it acts more
like a weight.

image::l2insertion_1st_650x300.png[scaledwidth="100%"]

In such a scenario, MidoNet will set up redirect logic as shown in the diagram
below. When VM2 sends a packet to VM1 (and specifically to VM1's MAC), at the
point labelled "redirect logic" (after port-level firewall, not shown) the
packet is redirected to the service function (red arrow 1). If the service
function allows the packet and therefore re-emits it, the redirect logic at the
service function redirects the packet so that it completes its journey to VM1
(red arrow 2).

image::l2insertion_2nd_650x300.png[scaledwidth="100%"]

The next diagram shows how packets from the protected port (and MAC) are
redirected.

image::l2insertion_3rd_650x300.png[scaledwidth="100%"]

The diagrams do now show how field number 4, the VLAN tag, is used. If the VLAN
tag is set to a value above zero, then MidoNet will push a VLAN tag with that
value onto packets redirected into the service function. MidoNet will also
expect the VLAN tag to be left on the packet if it is re-emitted from the
service function. MidoNet also uses the PCP bits in the VLAN header for its own
purposes, these should not be modified by the service function.

The use of field number 5, fail-open, is illustrated in the diagram below. If
fail-open is false, then when the service function fails all redirect traffic is
essentially dropped. If fail-open is true, there are cases when MidoNet can
detect failure of the service function link (link status only, we do not yet
have active monitoring neither in-band or out-of band) and the redirection logic
will automatically allow the traffic to skip the failed service function.

image::l2insertion_4th_650x300.png[scaledwidth="100%"]

Finally, the sixth field of L2Insertion, position, allows specifying the order
in which service functions should be traversed if there are multiple L2Insertion
objects with the same inspected port and mac but different service ports.

[IMPORTANT]
You can set L2Insertion's "port" (inspected port) field to a non-Neutron port's
UUID, like that of a router port or a L2GW port. But remember that it's not the
device, but the endpoint connected to the device (router or bridge) that's
protected (and therefore whose MAC should be configured in the L2Insertion). If
you want to protect a router port, you must put the L2Insertion object on the
bridge port facing the router port. Therefore itâ€™s not possible to protect the
exterior ports of a router (like those of the Edge Router).
